tvadvapurnavakalāyakomalaṃ premadohanamaśeṣamohanam |
brahma tattvaparacinmudātmakaṃ vīkṣya sammumuhuranvahaṃ striya: ||1||
tvat-vapu:-	Thy form
nava-kalāya-komalaṃ	fresh Kalaaya flower like soft
prema-dohanam-	evoking love
aśeṣa-mohanam	(and) to everyone charming
brahma tattva-	Brahman in essence
paracit-mud-ātmakaṃ	Supreme Consciousness, Bliss personifying
vīkṣya sammumuhu:-	seeing, were captivated
anvahaṃ striya:	day by day, the Gopikas
Day after day the Gopikas saw Thy form and were captivated. Thy form beautiful and fresh and soft like the Kalaaya flower, evoking the sentiment of love. Thy form charmingly enchanting everyone. Thy form, Brahman indeed, the personification of Existence, Reality, Supreme Consciousness and Bliss (Sat-Chit-Aananda).
manmathonmathitamānasā: kramāttvadvilokanaratāstatastata: |
gopikāstava na sehire hare kānanopagatimapyaharmukhe ||2||
manmatha-unmathita-	(by) Cupid churned
mānasā: kramāt-	minds, by and by
tvat-vilokana-ratā:-	Thee to see eager
tata:-tata:	again and again
gopikā:-	the Gopikaas
tava	Thy
na sehire	did not bear
hare	O Lord
kānana-upagatim-	the proceeding to the forest
api-aha:-mukhe	also at the beginning of the day
O Lord! The minds of these Gopikaas were oppressed by Cupid and because of their love for Thee, they were always eager to see Thee. O Hari! By and by they were unable to bear the separation caused by Thy going to the forest early in the morning to tend the cows.
nirgate bhavati dattadṛṣṭayastvadgatena manasā mṛgekṣaṇā: |
veṇunādamupakarṇya dūratastvadvilāsakathayā'bhiremire ||3||
nirgate bhavati	(when) Thou had set out
datta-dṛṣṭaya:-	with fixed gaze (on Thee)
tvat-gatena	Thou unto
manasā	with (such) minds
mṛgekṣaṇā:	the gazelle-eyed (women)
veṇu-nādam-	the flute sound
upakarṇya dūrata:-	hearing from far
tvat-	Thy
vilāsa-kathayā-	sportive activities (narrating)
abhiremire	experienced great joy
When Thou set out, the gazelle-eyed Gopikaas had their eyes fixed on Thee with their minds centred on Thee. They would listen to the sound of Thy flute from afar and revel in narrating and recounting Thy various sportive activities.
kānanāntamitavān bhavānapi snigdhapādapatale manorame |
vyatyayākalitapādamāsthita: pratyapūrayata veṇunālikām ||4||
kānana-antam-	into the forest
itavān bhavān-api	having gone, Thou also
snigdha-pādapa-tale	under the cool tree
manorame	(which was also) beautiful
vyatyaya-ākalita-	by crossing placed
pādam-āsthita:	legs standing
pratyapūrayata	kept filling
veṇunālikām	the flute pipe
Having gone to the forest, Thou would stand cross-legged under a shady beautiful tree and kept playing the flute and filling its pipe with life-breath.
mārabāṇadhutakhecarīkulaṃ nirvikārapaśupakṣimaṇḍalam |
drāvaṇaṃ ca dṛṣadāmapi prabho tāvakaṃ vyajani veṇukūjitam ||5||
māra-bāṇa-dhuta-	by Cupid's arrows shaken
khecarī-kulaṃ	the celestial damsels
nirvikāra-	motionless,
paśu-pakṣi-maṇḍalam	animals and birds multitudes
drāvaṇaṃ ca	melting and
dṛṣadām-api	stones even
prabho tāvakaṃ	O Lord! Thy
vyajani	was born
veṇu-kūjitam	flute music
O Lord! The music born out of Thy flute shook the celestial damsels with Cupid's arrows. It made the multitudes of animals and birds motionless, and even melted the stones and rocks.
veṇurandhrataralāṅgulīdalaṃ tālasañcalitapādapallavam |
tat sthitaṃ tava parokṣamapyaho saṃvicintya mumuhurvrajāṅganā: ||6||
veṇu-randhra-	(on) the stops of the flute
tarala-aṅgulī-dalaṃ	moving of the tender finger (tips)
tāla-sañcalita-	to keep time tapping
pāda-pallavam	the tender feet
tat sthitaṃ tava	that pose of Thee
parokṣam-api-	not directly seen, even though
aho	what a wonder
saṃvicintya	thinking about again and again
mumuhu:-	fell into a state of ecstasy
vrajāṅganā:	the women of Vraja
Thy tender finger tips moved deftly on the stops of the flute, as Thou kept time tapping Thy tender feet. This pose of Thine the Vraja women visualised in their minds again and again and got into a state of ecstasy. Oh how wonderful!
nirviśaṅkabhavadaṅgadarśinī: khecarī: khagamṛgān paśūnapi |
tvatpadapraṇayi kānanaṃ ca tā: dhanyadhanyamiti nanvamānayan ||7||
nirviśaṅka-	without any restrictions
bhavat-aṅga-	Thy form
darśinī: khecarī:	being able to see, the celestial damsels
khaga-mṛgān	birds
paśūn-api	and animals also
tvat-pada-praṇayi	(with) Thy feet having contact
kānanaṃ ca tā:	and the forest, they (the Gopikaas)
dhanya-dhanyam-iti	blessed blessed (they are) thus
nanu-amānayan	indeed regarded (them to be)
The celestial damsels were able to see Thy form without restrictions or hindrance. The birds and animals and cows also could see Thy form directly. Even the forest/earth was always having contact with Thy feet and saw Thy form as Thou roamed about. The Gopikaas of Vraja regarded all of them very fortunate and blessed.
āpibeyamadharāmṛtaṃ kadā veṇubhuktarasaśeṣamekadā |
dūrato bata kṛtaṃ durāśayetyākulā muhurimā: samāmuhan ||8||
āpibeyam-	(will) imbibe
adhara-amṛtaṃ kadā	the nectar of the lips, when
veṇu-mukta-	by the flute left over
rasa-śeṣam-	the last of the nectar
ekadā	even once
dūrata: bata	far fetched indeed
kṛtaṃ durāśaya-	is made this greed
iti-ākulā	thus lamenting
muhu:-imā:	again and again, these (Gopikaas)
samāmuhan	were in great distress
O when for once, we will imbibe the nectar of Thy lips, the last of it left over by the flute? Far fetched indeed is this greed.' Thus the Gopikaas lamented again and again and were in great distress and despair.
pratyahaṃ ca punaritthamaṅganāścittayonijanitādanugrahāt |
baddharāgavivaśāstvayi prabho nityamāpuriha kṛtyamūḍhatām ||9||
pratyahaṃ ca puna:-	every day and again
ittham-aṅganā:-	thus the women
cittayoni-janitāt-	the Cupid's caused
anugrahāt	blessings
baddha-rāga-vivaśā:-	bonding into attachment and so helpless
tvayi prabho	towards Thee O Lord!
nityam-āpu:-	always attained
iha kṛtya-mūḍhatām	here (in the worldly) concerns, indifference
Day after day and again and again, in this manner, the Cupid caused promptings to the Gopikaas. This was, in a way, a blessing to them. As it made them so bonded in attachment towards Thee, that they became helpless and so always attained indifference in the worldly concerns.
rāgastāvajjāyate hi svabhāvā-
nmokṣopāyo yatnata: syānna vā syāt |
tāsāṃ tvekaṃ taddvayaṃ labdhamāsīt
bhāgyaṃ bhāgyaṃ pāhi māṃ māruteśa ||10||
rāga:-tāvat-	attachment indeed
jāyate hi	comes
svabhāvāt-	in the natural course
mokṣa-upāya:	the means of liberation
yatnata: syāt-	even with effort may be
na vā syāt	or may not be
tāsāṃ tu-	for them (the Gopikaas) indeed
ekaṃ tat-dvayaṃ	one that (served as) both
labdham-āsīt	were attained
bhāgyam bhāgyam	fortunate, fortunate, indeed
pāhi māṃ	save me
māruteśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur
Indeed, attachment comes in the natural course. In spite of much effort the means of liberation may or may not be achieved. For the Gopikaas attachment to Thee served as both, as they attained liberation as a result. Oh fortunate indeed they were. O Lord of Guruvaayur! save me.